=====
5.0.0
=====

.. warning::

   Release 5.0.0 is currently under development. It is not available at the moment.

   **The release will be on 22.03.2023.**

Current pre-release: 5.0.0a.

Features
========

* `OpenStack Services Action <https://github.com/marketplace/actions/openstack-services-action>`_ now
  uses OpenStack Zed as the default OpenStack release
* `Mitogen <https://mitogen.networkgenomics.com/ansible_detailed.html>`_ is installed
  in all Ansible containers and can be used

  The use of the Mitogen strategy plugin for Ansible can be enabled via ``ansible.cfg``
  in the ``environments`` directory

  .. code-block:: ini

     [defaults]
     strategy_plugins = /usr/share/ansible/plugins/mitogen/ansible_mitogen/plugins/strategy
     strategy = mitogen_linear

* The testbed has been significantly simplified for new operators and developers and a Quick Start
  guide has been added
* In order to avoid having to install the manager and, if necessary, the control nodes
  manually when setting up a new OSISM environment, an ISO image is now available.
  `osism/node-image <https://github.com/osism/node-image>`_ automatically installs a new
  node with Ubuntu 22.04 on a software RAID 1 and prepares everything to be able to start
  directly.
* With the playbook ``ceph-purge-storage-node`` it is possible to remove all Ceph services
  on a Ceph storage node and remove all Ceph related data and configuration files.
* With the playbook ``ceph-purge-cluster`` it is possible to remove all Ceph services
  on all Ceph nodes and remove all Ceph related data and configuration files.
* `Netbox plugin OSISM <https://github.com/osism/netbox-plugin-osism>`_ now published
  at `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/netbox-plugin-osism/>`_
* With the Ansible role ``osism.services.osquery`` `osquery <https://www.osquery.io>`_
  can be deployed. osquery uses basic SQL commands to leverage a relational data-model to
  describe a device. It will be used in OSISM in the future to obtain facts about system
  states.

OpenStack image manager
-----------------------

* Some of the images (Almalinux, Rockylinux, Ubuntu) defined in ``etc/images`` are now
  automatically updated once a week
* `OpenStack image manager <https://github.com/osism/openstack-image-manager>`_ now published
  at `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/openstack-image-manager/>`_
* A container image ``harbor.services.osism.tech/osism/openstack-image-manager:latest`` is
  now available which also contains the default image definitions in ``/etc/openstack-image-manager``
* It is possible to define meta-information to individual versions of an image

  .. code-block:: yaml

     - name: Sample image
       [...]
       meta:
         architecture: x86_64
       versions:
         - version: '1.0'
           [...]
           meta:
             image_build_date: YYYY-MM-DD

* With the ``--validate`` parameter, it is possible to check the images available on an
  OpenStack environment for conformity with the Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) image standard.
* With the ``--check`` parameter, it is possible to check the correctness of local image
  definitions.
* With the parameter ``--filter`` it is possible to filter the list of images to be processed
  by their names with regular expressions. E.g. ``--filter "Ubuntu 2\d.\d\d"`` can be used
  to process all Ubuntu images with a version >= 20.04.
* The ``--images`` parameter can now be passed a single file in addition to a directory with
  YAML files with included image definitions
* All parameters marked as mandatory by the Sovereign Cloud Stack (SCS) image standard are
  now set or requested accordingly if they are not set.
* A dedicated crawler service to update the image definitions was sponsored by Plusserver
  and integration into the code base was started.

OSISM manager
-------------

* Support for routeros, which could be used to control Mikrotik devices, has been removed.
  Mikrotik devices were only used by the OSISM project itself in a baremetal testbed. Due
  to the change of the network hardware used by the OSISM project, only SONiC will be
  supported as NOS in the future.
* If `osism <https://pypi.org/project/osism/>`_ is installed via PyPI, Ansible is no longer
  installed as a dependency. This ensures that the services can also be used with older
  Ansible versions. If Ansible is to be installed as well, this can be done via an extra
  requirement using ``osism[ansible]``.
* Since only SONiC will be supported in the future, the following Ansible collections,
  which were previously available as technical previews, have been removed: ``arista.cvp``,
  ``arista.eos``, ``juniper.device``.
* The new Ansible collection `osism.sonic <https://github.com/osism-sonic/ansible-collection-sonic>`_,
  a downstream of
  `dellemc.enterprise_sonic <https://github.com/ansible-collections/dellemc.enterprise_sonic>`_,
  is used to manage SONiC.
* With ``enable_auditd`` it is possible to disable the ``osism.services.auditd`` role
  in the bootstrap and maintenance playbooks
* With the ``dump facts`` command, it is possible to output the facts of Ansible for
  specific systems.

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism dump facts mgr003
     +--------+---------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
     | Host   | Fact                                        | Value                                                          |
     +========+=============================================+================================================================+
     | mgr003 | _ansible_facts_gathered                     | True                                                           |
     +--------+---------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
     | mgr003 | ansible_all_ipv4_addresses                  | ['10.20.3.3', '10.15.0.112']                                   |
     +--------+---------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
     [...]

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism dump facts mgr003 ansible_memory_mb
     +--------+-------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
     | Host   | Fact              | Value                                                      |
     +========+===================+============================================================+
     | mgr003 | ansible_memory_mb | { 'nocache': {'free': 127134, 'used': 1551},               |
     |        |                   |   'real': {'free': 122304, 'total': 128685, 'used': 6381}, |
     |        |                   |   'swap': { 'cached': 0,                                   |
     |        |                   |             'free': 8191,                                  |
     |        |                   |             'total': 8191,                                 |
     |        |                   |             'used': 0}}                                    |
     +--------+-------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+

* With the ``log ansible`` command, it is possible to use the shell of `ARA <https://ara.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_.

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism log ansible
     (ara) help

     Documented commands (use 'help -v' for verbose/'help <topic>' for details):
     ===========================================================================
     alias  exit  history  quit          run_script  shell
     edit   help  macro    run_pyscript  set         shortcuts

     Application commands (type help <topic>):
     =========================================
     complete     host metrics  playbook delete   record delete  result show
     expire       host show     playbook list     record list    task delete
     help         play delete   playbook metrics  record show    task list
     host delete  play list     playbook prune    result delete  task metrics
     host list    play show     playbook show     result list    task show

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism log ansible playbook list
     +------+-----------+-------------------------------+--------+-----------------+----------------------------+-------+---------+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------+
     |   id | status    | controller                    | user   | ansible_version | path                       | tasks | results | hosts | started                     | duration        |
     +------+-----------+-------------------------------+--------+-----------------+----------------------------+-------+---------+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------+
     | 2322 | completed | osism-ansible.manager_default | dragon | 2.13.7          | /ansible/generic/facts.yml |     3 |      18 |     6 | 2022-12-30T09:19:30.587307Z | 00:00:15.500605 |
     | 2321 | completed | osism-ansible.manager_default | dragon | 2.13.7          | /ansible/generic/facts.yml |     3 |      17 |     6 | 2022-12-30T09:09:30.589686Z | 00:00:15.680527 |
     | 2320 | completed | osism-ansible.manager_default | dragon | 2.13.7          | /ansible/generic/facts.yml |     3 |      17 |     6 | 2022-12-30T08:59:30.577125Z | 00:00:15.524505 |
     | 2319 | completed | osism-ansible.manager_default | dragon | 2.13.7          | /ansible/generic/facts.yml |     3 |      18 |     6 | 2022-12-30T08:49:30.608174Z | 00:00:15.567697 |
     +------+-----------+-------------------------------+--------+-----------------+----------------------------+-------+---------+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------+

* With the ``log container`` command, it is possible to get the logs of a container.

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism log container mgr003 fluentd
     + sudo -E kolla_set_configs
     INFO:__main__:Loading config file at /var/lib/kolla/config_files/config.json
     INFO:__main__:Validating config file
     INFO:__main__:Kolla config strategy set to: COPY_ALWAYS
     INFO:__main__:Copying service configuration files
     [...]

* With the ``validate`` command, it is possible to run validators. If you call the
  ``validate`` command without further parameters, all available validators will be displayed.

  The validators used are available in the Ansible collection
  `osism.validations <https://github.com/osism/ansible-collection-validations>`_.

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism validate ulimits

     PLAY [Run ulimits validator] ***************************************************

     TASK [osism.validations.ulimits : Get nofiles limit] ***************************
     ok: [mgr003]
     [...]

* For Ceph, special playbooks were added to validate the deployment status of the OSD,
  MON and MGR services. The commands for use are ``osism validate ceph-osds``,
  ``osism validate ceph-mons``, and ``osism validate ceph-mgrs``.

* ``ansible.utils`` and ``kubernetes.core`` Ansible collections are now usable.

* The ``container`` command now allows the use of a prompt

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism container ctl003
     ctl003>>> images
     REPOSITORY                    TAG       IMAGE ID       CREATED        SIZE
     quay.io/osism/fluentd         zed       d30381217d55   21 hours ago   522MB
     quay.io/osism/cron            zed       62d87cfb1f53   21 hours ago   254MB
     quay.io/osism/kolla-toolbox   zed       5d1afcf2ac05   21 hours ago   826MB
     quay.io/osism/rabbitmq        zed       5e36e8a4205a   21 hours ago   308MB
     ctl003>>> info
     Client:
      Context:    default
      Debug Mode: false
      Plugins:
       app: Docker App (Docker Inc., v0.9.1-beta3)
       buildx: Docker Buildx (Docker Inc., v0.9.1-docker)
       scan: Docker Scan (Docker Inc., v0.23.0)
     [...]


* The ``console`` command now allows shortcuts to select specific console types

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism console ctl003  # SSH
     dragon@ctl003:~$

     $ osism console .ctl003  # Ansible
     Welcome to the ansible console. Type help or ? to list commands.

     dragon@ctl003 (1)[f:5]$

     $ osism console ctl003/rabbitmq  # Container
     (rabbitmq)[rabbitmq@ctl003 /]$

     $ osism console ctl003/  # Container prompt
     ctl003>>>

     $ osism console :ctl00[1-3]  # clush
     Enter 'quit' to leave this interactive mode
     Working with nodes: ctl[001-003]
     clush>

* So far, the facts have been updated every 10 minutes. This is not necessary. Through
  the standard use of Redis as a cache backend, the facts are kept 24 hours. The facts
  are now only updated every 12 hours.

* With ``osism validate ceph-config`` you can now check whether the configuration for
  Ceph is OK (https://docs.ceph.com/projects/ceph-ansible/en/latest/index.html#configuration-validation).

* The use of the OpenStack Image Manager has been integrated. For this purpose, the new
  command ``manage`` was added. With ``osism manage images``, the images on an OpenStack
  environment can now be managed using the OpenStack Image Manager. Currently, only the
  image definitions provided by the OpenStack Image Manager can be used. The option to
  use your own image definitions will be added in the future.

* If ``osism apply`` is executed without a role to be executed, a table with all available
  roles will now be displayed.

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism apply
     2023-01-17 19:19:04.339 | INFO     | osism.commands.apply:take_action:159 - No playbook
     given for execution. The playbooks listed in the table can be used.
     +------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+
     | Role                                                             | Environment    |
     |------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------|
     | netdata                                                          | monitoring     |
     | remove-netdata                                                   | monitoring     |
     | remove-zabbix-agent                                              | monitoring     |
     | openstack-health-monitor                                         | monitoring     |
     | auditd                                                           | generic        |

* The ``osism console`` command now supports the clustershell and can be used to operate a
  set group of systems at the same time.

  .. code-block:: console

     $ osism console :ctl00[1-3]
     Enter 'quit' to leave this interactive mode
     Working with nodes: ctl[001-003]
     clush>

* With the role ``osism.commons.docker_login`` it is possible to perform a login to a registry
  independently of ``osism.services.docker``.

* By switching from ``ansible`` to ``ansible-core``, the size of the Ansible manager images
  has been significantly reduced (appr. 400 MByte / image)

* With the parameters ``mariadb_datadir_volume`` and ``rabbitmq_datadir_volume`` it is possible
  to configure dedicated data volumes for the MariaDB and RabbitmQ services. This allows, for
  example, dedicated NVMes to be used for these services.

Other
=====

* The Kubernetes CAPI images have been upgraded from Ubuntu 20.04 to Ubuntu 22.04.

Deprecations
============

* The role ``osism.services.bird`` is deprecated. In future, FRRouting (``osism.services.frr``)
  will be used.
* The role ``osism.services.minikube`` is deprecated. In future ``osism.services.k8s``
  will be used.
* Heat is deprecated in favor of more generic Infrastructure as Code tools like Terraform
  as of now and will be removed in the future (exact removal date is not yet known)
* Swift (currently available as Technical Preview) will be removed in favor of Ceph RGW
* Trove (currently available as Technical Preview) will be removed in favor of Kubernetes
  database operators
* Skydive (currently available as Technical Preview) will be removed in the future, the
  project is not maintained anymore, last commit is 8th Jan 2022
  (https://review.opendev.org/c/openstack/kolla/+/869191)
* The login to a registry with the ``osism.services.docker`` role is deprecated in favor
  of the new ``osism.commons.docker_login`` role.

Removals
========

* Monasca was deprecated in Kolla. In preparation for the introduction of Monasca in OSISM
  (which will no longer happen after deprecation), three infrastructure services required only
  by Monasca have already been built as images: Kafka, Storm, and Zookeeper. These images were
  removed without prior deprecation as they were only available for the planned Monasca
  integration and are not yet in use anywhere.
* The ``ospurge`` wrapper script has been removed from the ``osism.services.openstackclient`` role.
  The ospurge project is no longer compatible with the current OpenStack SDK. The command
  ``openstack project purge`` can be used as an alternative.
* Support for Zabbix was already removed in OSISM 3.0.0. The Ansible collection
  ``community.zabbix`` was still present as a leftover.
* The ``docker-compose`` package is uninstalled by the ``osism.commons.docker_compose`` role.
  The Compose v2 plugin for Docker is now used instead of the old standalone ``docker-compose`` CLI.
  A dummy script has been added to ``/usr/local/bin`` which displays a corresponding message when
  using ``docker-compose``.

Housekeeping
============

* In all ``docker-compose.yml`` files the declaration of the version was removed. This is no
  longer necessary in the latest
  `Compose specification <https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/>`_.

Upgrade notes
=============

* The ARA library has been updated to version ``1.6.x`` in all Ansible containers. If
  the version of the ARA server on the manager is lower than ``1.6.x`` problems may occur.
  When updating the Ansible container, the ARA server should also be updated to version
  ``1.6.x`` accordingly.
* Kolla-Ansible now only supports OpenSearch instead of ElasticSearch + Kibana. 
  If you are currently deploying ElasticSearch with Kolla Ansible, you should backup
  the data before starting the upgrade. The contents of the ElasticSearch data volume
  will be automatically moved to the OpenSearch volume. The ElasticSearch, ElasticSearch
  Curator and Kibana containers will be removed automatically. The inventory must be
  updated so that the elasticsearch group is renamed to opensearch, and the kibana group
  is renamed to opensearch-dashboards. A new secret ``opensearch_dashboards_password`` has
  to be added to the ``secrets.yml`` file.
* The ``ovn`` role has been split into ``ovn-controller`` and ``ovn-db`` roles, therefore users
  that have ``ovn_extra_volumes`` configured need to adapt their config to use 
  ``ovn_db_extra_volumes`` or ``ovn_controller_extra_volumes``.
* The ``ironic_dnsmasq_dhcp_range`` and ``ironic_dnsmasq_default_gateway`` parameters were
  replaced with ``ironic_dnsmasq_dhcp_ranges``.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     # Old way
     ironic_dnsmasq_dhcp_range: "192.168.112.50,192.168.112.60"
     ironic_dnsmasq_default_gateway: "192.168.112.1"

     # New way
     ironic_dnsmasq_dhcp_ranges:
       - range: "192.168.112.50,192.168.112.60"
         routers: "192.168.112.1"

References
==========

OpenStack Zed press announcement: https://www.openstack.org/software/zed/

OpenStack Zed release notes:

* Aodh: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/aodh/zed.html
* Barbican: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/barbican/zed.html
* Ceilometer: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ceilometer/zed.html
* Cinder: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cinder/zed.html
* Cloudkitty: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cloudkitty/zed.html
* Designate: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/designate/zed.html
* Glance: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/glance/zed.html
* Heat: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/heat/zed.html
* Horizon: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/horizon/zed.html
* Ironic: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ironic/zed.html
* Keystone: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/keystone/zed.html
* Manila: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/manila/zed.html
* Neutron: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/zed.html
* Nova: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/nova/zed.html
* Octavia: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/octavia/zed.html
* Overview: https://releases.openstack.org/zed/index.html
* Placement: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/placement/zed.html
* Senlin: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/senlin/zed.html
