=====
5.1.0
=====

Release date: 7. April 2023

In addition to regular updates, a
`connection problem to FIPs using neutron_ovn_distributed_fip=true <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/490>`_
has been fixed in this release.

Furthermore, the OVN as well as OVS components have been updated to the latest
stable release from upstream and will be updated to the latest stable release
at the time of a OSISM release in the future.

As of OSISM 5.0.0, all OpenStack images switched to the use of stable branches
instead of releases. All commits on the stable branches at the time of the
OSISM release are included in the OpenStack images.

Known issues
============

* If you have already upgraded to 5.0.0 and switched from Elasticsearch to
  Opensearch, deploy the update for Opensearch using the ``deploy`` action
  instead of the ``upgrade`` action. The ``upgrade`` action for Opensearch
  contains a bug and always assumes that a migration from Elasticsearch to
  Opensearch should be performed.

* When using the Neutron Open vSwitch L2 agent with the Neutron iptables
  firewall driver on Ubuntu 22.04, there is currently an
  `issue <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/428>`_ which prevents
  traffic on flat/provider networks. The current workaround is to switch to the
  `Open vSwitch Firewall Driver <https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/latest/contributor/internals/openvswitch_firewall.html>`_.

  The driver is enabled by an entry in the ``environments/kolla/files/overlays/neutron/openvswitch_agent.ini``
  configuration file.

  .. code-block:: ini

     [securitygroup]
     firewall_driver = openvswitch

  When making the switch, refer to the following section in the Neutron
  documentation: `Upgrade path from iptables hybrid driver <https://docs.openstack.org/neutron/latest/contributor/internals/openvswitch_firewall.html#upgrade-path-from-iptables-hybrid-driver>`_

Versions
========

=================================  =========
service                            version
=================================  =========
aodh                               15.0.1
barbican                           15.0.1
ceilometer                         19.0.1
ceph                               16.2.11
cinder                             21.1.1
cloudkitty                         17.0.1
cron                               3.0
designate                          15.0.1
dnsmasq                            2.86
etcd                               3.3.27
fluentd                            4.4.2
glance                             25.1.1
gnocchi                            4.5.0
grafana                            9.4.7
haproxy                            2.4.18
heat                               19.0.1
horizon                            23.0.1
influxdb                           1.8.10
ironic                             21.1.1
ironic_inspector                   11.1.1
iscsid                             2.1.5
keepalived                         2.2.4
keystone                           22.0.1
kolla-toolbox                      15.1.1
kolla_toolbox                      15.1.1
kuryr                              10.0.0
libvirt                            8.0.0
magnum                             15.0.2
manila                             15.1.1
mariadb                            10.6.12
memcached                          1.6.14
mistral                            15.0.0
multipathd                         0.8.8
neutron                            21.1.1
nova                               26.1.1
octavia                            11.0.1
opensearch                         2.3.0
openvswitch                        3.1.1
ovn                                23.3.0
placement                          8.0.0
prometheus                         2.38.0
prometheus_alertmanager            0.24.0
prometheus_blackbox_exporter       0.22.0
prometheus_cadvisor                0.45.0
prometheus_elasticsearch_exporter  1.5.0
prometheus_haproxy_exporter        0.13.0
prometheus_libvirt_exporter        5.1.0
prometheus_memcached_exporter      0.10.0
prometheus_msteams                 1.5.1
prometheus_mtail                   3.0.0
prometheus_mysqld_exporter         0.14.0
prometheus_node_exporter           1.4.0
prometheus_openstack_exporter      5.1.0
prometheus_ovn_exporter            1.0.4
rabbitmq                           3.11.13
redis                              6.0.16
senlin                             14.0.0
skyline                            1.0.0
swift                              2.30.1
tgtd                               1.0.80
trove                              18.0.1
=================================  =========
