=====
6.0.0
=====

Release date: 20. September 2023

General notes
=============

* OpenStack 2023.1 (Antelope) is the OpenStack release that is used.

* Ceph Quincy is the Ceph release that is used.

* OVN and OVS are built from source and no longer installed via packages.

* There are NG playbooks for the first services that automatically recognise
  the state of a service. This means that it is no longer necessary to explicitly
  specify the action to be performed. At the moment, these playbooks are available
  for MariaDB (``mariadb-ng``) and RabbitMQ (``rabbitmq-ng``).

* The OpenStack resource manager is a new tool for managing resources such
  as amphorae.

* The OpenStack flavor manager is a new tool for managing OpenStack flavors (instance
  types). In the OSISM CLI, it can be used via ``manage flavors``.

* It is possible to deploy a Kubernetes cluster on the management plane with K3s.
  In the future, this will be used to include the control plane for Cluster API and
  to deploy additional services close to the control and management plane. This is
  already possible in the testbed as well as in the Cloud in a Box.

* Everything is prepared for pulp to be built as a central service for environments with
  air gap requirements.

* IPv6 is now completely supported.

* The SCS metering service is now deployable via ``osism.services.metering``.

Testbed
=======

* The Terraform definitions previously included directly in the repository have been moved
  to a separate repository (osism/terraform-base).

* The SCS metering service is now deployed in the testbed.

* Keycloak/Keystone integration has been further improved.

* Refstack is now testing Guideline 2022.11 in the CI.

* The manager is used as a central proxy to test the Air Gap mechanism.

* The stability of the deployments has been significantly improved.

* Services that are no longer needed have been removed (virtualbmc, nexus).

* The documentation has been completely revised and is now available here:
  https://osism.github.io/docs/advanced-guides/testbed

Cloud in a Box
==============

* There are now two types of Cloud in a Box:

  The sandbox type is intended for developers and demonstrations. A full OSISM installation
  is one there which also includes Ceph and OpenSearch, for example. In the course of the
  installation, necessary images, networks, etc. are also created.

  The edge type is intended to be deployed as an appliance to provide an edge cloud on a
  single node. Compared to the sandbox, certain services are not provided there or are
  implemented differently. For example, OpenSearch is not deployed because the logs are
  delivered to a central location. The storage backend will also be implemented differently
  there in the future instead of Ceph.

* The Ceph failure domain has been changed from hosts to devices. This means that errors no
  longer occur when the system is rebooted.

* Swift is now available as an endpoint. This means that Object Storage can also be used.

* The SCS Flavors have been updated to the current SCS standard.

* For Octavia, the Amphora Driver is now used instead of the OVN plugin as long as the
  Octavia OVN driver is feature complete to Octavia amphora driver.

* The documentation has been completely revised and is now available here:
  https://osism.github.io/docs/advanced-guides/cloud-in-a-box

Deprecations
============

* It is again noted that the old scripts of the form ``osism-`` will be removed in the future.
  A note has been added to the scripts showing this when they are executed.

* The following services are deprecated and will be removed with OSISM 6.1.0.

  * Adminer
  * Bird
  * Patchman (including the client)
  * VirtualBMC

* The Mitogen plugin for Ansible is no longer really maintained in upstrean. It no longer works
  with the current Ansible versions. Therefore, it will be removed again with OSISM 6.1.0.

Removals
========

* Our storage systems on which minio.services.osism.tech and harbor.services.osism.tech
  are currently provided will no longer be available in the future. The artefacts were
  moved to other systems. Container images can be pulled via Quay.io. Everything that
  was previously provided via MiniO will in future be provided on the REGIO.cloud
  infrastructure. The links in all README files etc. have already been changed. The
  shutdown of the systems will take place on 20 October.

* The so far unused OPA integration in ``osism.services.docker`` has been removed.

* The so far unused Zum integration in ``osism.services.docker`` has been removed as
  Zun is currently unusable as a service.

Housekeeping
============

* Ansible Lint is applied to all Ansible playbooks and roles.

* Container files were optimised through the use of EOF and multistage builds.

* Python code is now tested with MyPy.

* A majority of the CI jobs were switched from Github Actions to Zuul.

Upgrade notes
=============

* In the Kolla environment, you now have to work with ansible_facts to access the facts
  from other hosts via the host vars.

  .. code-block:: console

     No longer works (old way):

     hostvars[host]['ansible_' + hostvars[host]['storage_interface']]

     New way:

     hostvars[host]['ansible_facts'][hostvars[host]['storage_interface']]

Known issues
============

* The Mitogen plugin no longer works with the current Ansible versions. The plugin is
  deprecated (see Deprecations) and will be removed in the future.

Other
=====

* Refstack 2022.11 results

  .. code-block:: none

     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457470 | orchestrator | ======
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457489 | orchestrator | Totals
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457494 | orchestrator | ======
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457498 | orchestrator | Ran: 299 tests in 1785.1180 sec.
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457502 | orchestrator |  - Passed: 294
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457506 | orchestrator |  - Skipped: 5
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457510 | orchestrator |  - Expected Fail: 0
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457514 | orchestrator |  - Unexpected Success: 0
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457518 | orchestrator |  - Failed: 0
     2023-09-20 08:35:40.457522 | orchestrator | Sum of execute time for each test: 1300.8936 sec.

Versions
========

OpenStack
---------

=================================  =========
service                            version
=================================  =========
aodh                               16.0.1
barbican                           16.0.1
bifrost                            16.1.1
ceilometer                         20.0.1
cinder                             22.1.1
cloudkitty                         18.0.1
cron                               3.0
designate                          16.0.2
dnsmasq                            2.86
fluentd                            4.5.1
glance                             26.0.0
gnocchi                            4.6.1
grafana                            10.1.2
haproxy                            2.4.22
heat                               20.0.1
horizon                            23.1.1
ironic                             21.4.1
ironic_inspector                   11.4.1
iscsid                             2.1.5
keepalived                         2.2.4
keystone                           23.0.1
kolla-toolbox                      16.1.1
kolla_toolbox                      16.1.1
kuryr                              11.0.0
magnum                             16.0.2
manila                             16.0.1
mariadb                            10.6.15
memcached                          1.6.14
mistral                            16.0.0
multipathd                         0.8.8
neutron                            22.0.3
nova                               27.1.1
nova_libvirt                       8.0.0
octavia                            12.0.1
opensearch                         2.9.0
opensearch_dashboards              2.9.0
openvswitch                        3.1.2
ovn                                23.6.1
placement                          9.0.0
prometheus                         2.38.0
prometheus_alertmanager            0.24.0
prometheus_blackbox_exporter       0.22.0
prometheus_cadvisor                0.45.0
prometheus_elasticsearch_exporter  1.5.0
prometheus_haproxy_exporter        0.13.0
prometheus_libvirt_exporter        6.0.0
prometheus_memcached_exporter      0.10.0
prometheus_msteams                 1.5.1
prometheus_mtail                   3.0.0
prometheus_mysqld_exporter         0.14.0
prometheus_node_exporter           1.4.0
prometheus_openstack_exporter      6.0.0
rabbitmq                           3.11.23
redis                              6.0.16
senlin                             15.0.0
skyline                            2.0.1
swift                              2.31.2
tgtd                               1.0.80
=================================  =========

References
==========

OpenStack 2023.1 press announcement: https://www.openstack.org/software/antelope/

OpenStack 2023.1 release notes:

* Barbican: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/barbican/2023.1.html
* Ceilometer: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ceilometer/2023.1.html
* Cinder: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cinder/2023.1.html
* Cloudkitty: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cloudkitty/2023.1.html
* Designate: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/designate/2023.1.html
* Glance: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/glance/2023.1.html
* Heat: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/heat/2023.1.html
* Horizon: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/horizon/2023.1.html
* Ironic: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ironic/2023.1.html
* Keystone: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/keystone/2023.1.html
* Manila: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/manila/2023.1.html
* Neutron: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.1.html
* Nova: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/nova/2023.1.html
* Octavia: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/octavia/2023.1.html
* Overview: https://releases.openstack.org/2023.1/index.html
* Placement: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/placement/2023.1.html
* Senlin: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/senlin/2023.1.html
* Skyline: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-apiserver/2023.1.html, https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-console/2023.1.html

Changes
=======

OpenStack
---------

The changes to the OpenStack branches ``stable/2023.1`` are only listed from
the first minor release of OSISM 6.
