======
7.0.0a
======

**This is a pre-release. Do not use in production.**

First things first
==================

General notes
=============

* Shortly before the first pre-release, `gilt <https://github.com/retr0h/gilt>`_
  made a major release which led to breaking changes. It is therefore important
  for the moment to install python-gilt in a version < 2 when synchronising the
  configuration repository against the generics. In the CI and within the container
  images, we currently use ``python-gilt == 1.2.3``.

Deprecations
============

Removals
========

Housekeeping
============

Upgrade notes
=============

* The use of RabbitMQ quorum queues is now possible and recommended. The parameter
  ``om_enable_rabbitmq_quorum_queues`` is added to ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``
  for this purpose.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     om_enable_rabbitmq_quorum_queues: yes

* The use of ProxySQL for MariaDB is now possible and it is recommended to switch
  to it as part of the upgrade. The parameter ``enable_proxysql`` is added to
  ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml`` for this purpose.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     enable_proxysql: yes

  The secrets listed below (``proxysql_admin_password``, ``proxysql_stats_password``,
  ``mariadb_monitor_password``) must also be added or changed.

  When upgrading, it is important to update MariaDB first. This is followed by the
  load balancer. ProxySQL is deployed with the load balancer play.

* The following secrets must be added in ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml``:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     prometheus_bcrypt_salt:       # generate with: pwgen 22 1 <-- there's a 22
     prometheus_grafana_password:  # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     prometheus_password:          # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     proxysql_admin_password:      # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     proxysql_stats_password:      # generate with: pwgen 32 1

* The parameter ``mariadb_monitoring_password`` in ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml``
  has to be renamed to ``mariadb_monitor_password``. If the parameter is not present,
  it is added.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     mariadb_monitor_password:     # generate with: pwgen 32 1

* The following parameters must be removed from the configuration repository from
  ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     ceph_nova_user: nova
     ceph_nova_keyring: ceph.client.nova.keyring

* Parameters for the Netbox service in ``environments/infrastructure/configuration.yml`` or
  ``secrets.yml`` must now also be added in ``environments/manager/configuration.yml`` or
  ``secrets.yml``. In an upcoming  release, the parameters can be removed from the
  infrastructure environment.

Other
=====

* Refstack 2022.11 results
 
Versions
========

References
==========

OpenStack 2023.2 press announcement: https://www.openstack.org/software/openstack-bobcat

OpenStack 2023.2 release notes: https://releases.openstack.org/bobcat/index.html

Release notes for each OpenStack service:

* Barbican: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/barbican/2023.2.html
* Ceilometer: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ceilometer/2023.2.html
* Cinder: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cinder/2023.2.html
* Designate: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/designate/2023.2.html
* Glance: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/glance/2023.2.html
* Heat: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/heat/2023.2.html
* Horizon: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/horizon/2023.2.html
* Ironic: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ironic/2023.2.html
* Keystone: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/keystone/2023.2.html
* Manila: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/manila/2023.2.html
* Neutron: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.2.html
* Nova: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/nova/2023.2.html
* Octavia: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/octavia/2023.2.html
* Placement: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/placement/2023.2.html
* Skyline: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-apiserver/2023.2.html, https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-console/2023.2.html
