======
7.0.0c
======

**This is a pre-release. Do not use in production.**

Report any feedback on this pre-release in the issues
`osism/issues#841 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/841>`_.

This pre-release is set in the configuration repository like a stable release.
Instructions for the upgrade can be found in the `upgrade guide <https://osism.github.io/docs/guides/upgrade-guide/manager>`_.

First things first
==================

* The Keycloak deployment via Docker Compose, which was previously included
  as a technical preview, has been completely revised and is now deployed on
  Kubernetes. No migration from the old deployment via Docker Compose to the
  new deployment via Kubernetes has been prepared. If you are currently using
  the Keycloak service, do not upgrade the Keycloak service and contact us in
  advance.

* The switch from classic queue mirroring and durable queues to quorum queues
  in RabbitMQ has not yet been tested and documented. So far, there is only the
  `Kolla-Ansible documentation <https://docs.openstack.org/kolla-ansible/latest/reference/message-queues/rabbitmq.html#high-availability>`_,
  which requires all services to be stopped. We are still working on a better
  approach.

General notes
=============

* Shortly before the first pre-release, `gilt <https://github.com/retr0h/gilt>`_
  made a major release which led to breaking changes. It is therefore important
  for the moment to install python-gilt in a version < 2 when synchronising the
  configuration repository against the generics. In the CI and within the container
  images, we currently use ``python-gilt == 1.2.3``.

Deprecations
============

* The role for deploying the Tang service (``osism.services.tang``) is deprecated in preparation for removal
  as it is currently not in a usable state. An attempt will be made to make the role usable until the next
  release. The same applies to Clevis integration via the ``osism.commons.clevis`` role.

Removals
========

* The role for deploying the OpenLDAP service (``osism.services.openldap``) has been removed.
* The manager plays to control the Vault service (seal, unseal, ..) have been removed as these tasks will
  be realized directly via the OSISM CLI in the future.

Housekeeping
============

New features in the OSISM CLI
=============================

* With the ``osism manage image octavia`` command it is possible to rotate the Octavia Amphora image,
  which is rebuilt daily. Older images are deactivated. The old images must be removed manually after
  rotating the amphorae instances.
* With the ``osism manage image clusterapi`` command it is possible to import all currently stable Cluster
  API images (v1.27, v1.28, and v1.29). As soon as new minor or major versions are available, these are also
  imported. Old and no longer used versions must currently be removed manually.

Technical Previews
==================

* The Keycloak service previously provided with Docker Compose has been switched to the new internal
  Kubernetes cluster and is available there as a technical preview.
* In preparation for the migration to Rook, the Rook operator is deployable on the internal Kubernetes
  cluster.


To be considered
================

* The ``hosts_interface`` parameter is now set to ``internal_interface`` by default.

Upgrade notes
=============

* The Keystone role ``service`` is required by a number of OpenStack services. The
  role has been created automatically with new deployments for some time now. It is
  possible that this role is not yet available on older deployments and must be created
  once in preparation for the upgrade. You can check whether the role is available in
  the output of ``openstack --os-cloud admin role list``. If it does not exist, it can
  be created with ``openstack --os-cloud admin role create service``.

* The use of ProxySQL for MariaDB is now possible and it is recommended to switch
  to it as part of the upgrade. The parameter ``enable_proxysql`` is added to
  ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml`` for this purpose.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     enable_proxysql: yes

  The secrets listed below (``proxysql_admin_password``, ``proxysql_stats_password``,
  ``mariadb_monitor_password``) must also be added or changed.

  When migrating to ProxySQL, it is important to upgrade MariaDB first.

  When migrating to ProxySQL, it is important to perform the loadbalancer upgrade
  before all OpenStack service upgrades. To make sure that the OpenStack services
  continue to work after the upgrade when ProxySQL is enabled as part of the upgrade,
  the ProxySQL service must have been deployed first. The ProxySQL service is deployed
  with the loadbalancer play.

* The following secrets must be added in ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml``:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     octavia_persistence_database_password:  # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     prometheus_bcrypt_salt:                 # generate with: pwgen 22 1 <-- there's a 22
     prometheus_grafana_password:            # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     prometheus_password:                    # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     proxysql_admin_password:                # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     proxysql_stats_password:                # generate with: pwgen 32 1

* The parameter ``mariadb_monitoring_password`` in ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml``
  has to be renamed to ``mariadb_monitor_password``. If the parameter is not present,
  it is added.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     mariadb_monitor_password:     # generate with: pwgen 32 1

* The following parameters must be removed from the configuration repository from
  ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     ceph_nova_user: nova
     ceph_nova_keyring: ceph.client.nova.keyring

* Parameters for the Netbox service in ``environments/infrastructure/configuration.yml`` or
  ``secrets.yml`` must now also be added in ``environments/manager/configuration.yml`` or
  ``secrets.yml``. In an upcoming  release, the parameters can be removed from the
  infrastructure environment.

* The Ansible callback plugin ``osism.commons.still_alive`` is now available to avoid timeouts
  for long-running tasks. This currently has to be explicitly enabled in the Ansible configuration.
  This is done in the ``environments/ansible.cfg`` file in the configuration repository.
  The callback plugin is enabled by default in the future.

  .. code-block:: ini

     [defaults]
     ...
     stdout_callback = osism.commons.still_alive

* In the inventory, the ``nova_backend`` parameter must be added to the host vars of
  compute nodes where local storage is used.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     nova_backend: default

* The persistence feature in Octavia was enabled by default. This requires an additional
  database, which is only created when Octavia play is run in bootstrap mode first.

  .. code-block:: none

     osism apply -a bootstrap octavia

  The secret ``octavia_persistence_database_password`` (see above) must be added to
  ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml`` before.

* The SSL certificate file ``haproxy.pem`` is now available in a different location in the
  ``haproxy`` container. Previously it was stored under ``/etc/haproxy/haproxy.pem``. From
  now on it is stored under ``/etc/haproxy/certificates/haproxy.pem``. If you have customised
  the configuration for the haproxy service or use overlays for this, adjust the locations of
  the SSL certificate as required.

* Due to the upgrade from Fluentd to version 5, some directory names within the container
  image for Fluentd have changed. If you have worked with overlay files in the Fluentd service,
  check these in advance. Currently we know that ``/var/run/td-agent`` is now available as
  ``/var/run/fluentd`` (check `GitHub issue #864 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/864>`_
  for details).  We assume that other directory names have changed similarly.

Known issues
============


* If error ``Couldn't fetch the key client.bootstrap-rbd at /var/lib/ceph/bootstrap-rbd/."``
  occurs when updating Ceph in task ``create potentially missing keys (rbd and rbd-mirror)``,
  create directory ``/var/lib/ceph/bootstrap-rbd/`` on the 1st control node used for Ceph.
  Use the UID ``64045`` and the GID ``64045``. Set ``0755`` as permissions.

* The manager service is updated via ``osism update manager``. If this command is not yet
  available, you can use ``osism-update-manager`` as an alternative.

  .. code-block:: none

     osism: 'update manager' is not an osism command. See 'osism --help'.

The following issues have been noticed during tests and could not yet be reproduced and fixed:

* `unhealthy mariadb service on the manager <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/863>`_

Other
=====

* Refstack 2022.11 results
 
Versions
========

References
==========

OpenStack 2023.2 press announcement: https://www.openstack.org/software/openstack-bobcat

OpenStack 2023.2 release notes: https://releases.openstack.org/bobcat/index.html

Release notes for each OpenStack service:

* Barbican: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/barbican/2023.2.html
* Ceilometer: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ceilometer/2023.2.html
* Cinder: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cinder/2023.2.html
* Designate: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/designate/2023.2.html
* Glance: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/glance/2023.2.html
* Heat: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/heat/2023.2.html
* Horizon: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/horizon/2023.2.html
* Ironic: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ironic/2023.2.html
* Keystone: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/keystone/2023.2.html
* Manila: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/manila/2023.2.html
* Neutron: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.2.html
* Nova: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/nova/2023.2.html
* Octavia: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/octavia/2023.2.html
* Placement: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/placement/2023.2.html
* Skyline: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-apiserver/2023.2.html, https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-console/2023.2.html
