=======
OSISM 7
=======

Instructions for the upgrade can be found in the `upgrade guide <https://osism.github.io/docs/guides/upgrade-guide/manager>`_.

7.0.0a, 7.0.0b, 7.0.0c, 7.0.0d are pre-releases. Do not use these releases.

7.0.3
=====

Release date: 3. May 2024

* The Ceph service images have not been rebuilt. No upgrade of Ceph is required.

* The OpenStack service images for Octavia and Nova have been rebuilt. Upgrades of the Octavia
  and Nova services are recommended. No upgrades of other OpenStack and associated
  infrastructure services such as MariaDB or RabbitMQ are required.

  * The Nova images have been rebuilt to add packages to be able to use vTMP (`osism/issues#1008 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/1008>`_)
    If this is not relevant, the upgrade can be skipped.

  * The octavia images have been rebuilt to resolve an issue when creating a LB + a listener
    with an allowed_cidr with the fully-populated API (`osism/issues#980 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/980>`_)

* During the preparation of the upgrades of the regions of the PCO a bug (`osism/issues#937 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/973>`_)
  has been noticed which leads to a delay of up to 2 minutes between the necessary container stops and starts.
  This is due to a bug in the service units of all Kolla services. The bug is fixed in the current release.
  To avoid the delay during an upgrade, a fix must be applied in advance for all  srvice units from
  Kolla.

  .. code-block:: console

     osism apply fix-gh937

* The ``openstack_cacert`` parameter used by Kolla is now set to ``"/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt"``
  by default. The previous default was ``""``. If this is not wanted, the parameter must be overwritten in
  ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``.

* The ``ironic_agent_files_directory`` parameter used by Kolla is now set to ``/share/ironic`` by default.
  The previous default was ``"{{ node_custom_config }}"``. If this is not wanted, the parameter must be overwritten
  in ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``. This is in preparation for the Ironic IPA images no longer being
  stored in the configuration repository but within the manager service at runtime.

* The Ironic IPA images are now downloaded from ironic play by default. If this is not wanted,
  ``enable_ironic_agent_download_images: false`` must be set in ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``.
  The Ironic IPA images can now also be downloaded independently of the ironic play with ``osism apply ironic-download-ipa-images``.

* The ``ceph_cluster_fsid`` parameter is now generated automatically. It can be removed from ``environments/configuration.yml``.
  The automatically generated ``ceph_clusterfs_fsid`` parameter is set to the value of the ``fsid``
  parameter from ``environments/ceph/configuration.yml``.

* Versions not yet pinned in the manager environment of the configuration repository (Ansible collections, ``osism/cfg-generics``, ..)
  are now automatically pinned during synchronisation with ``gilt overlay``. This also applies to the
  ``osism update manager`` script.

* The Docker version and the Docker CLI version can now also be managed via ``osism/cfg-generics``.
  It is recommended to pin the Docker version in ``environments/configuration.yml``.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     docker_version: '5:24.0.9'

* Kubernetes Cluster API for the 1.30 series is available. They are now provided directly with
  ``osism manage image clusterapi``. This means that Kubernetes Cluster API images are now available
  for series 1.27, 1.28, 1.29 and 1.30.

* All Ansible collections have been prepared for use with Ubuntu 24.04. It is currently not recommended to
  upgrade existing clusters to Ubuntu 24.04 or to install new clusters with Ubuntu 24.04. There will be a
  note in the release notes from which Ubuntu 24.04 can be used.

* A new role ``tempest`` has been added to the Ansible collection ``osism.validations``. This makes it possible
  to perform significantly more tests than with the previously used ``osism.validations.refstack`` role. The new
  role will be used in the testbed in future to significantly increase the number of tests performed in the CI.

* New documentation for the `project manager <https://osism.tech/docs/guides/operations-guide/openstack/day2-operations/project-manager>`_
  and the `simple stress <https://osism.tech/docs/guides/operations-guide/openstack/day2-operations/simple-stress>`_.

* When using the reboot play, it is now possible to wait for the reboot to be completed (`osism/issues#758 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/758>`_).

  .. code-block:: console

     osism apply reboot \
       -e reboot_wait=yes \
       -e ireallymeanit=yes

* Monitoring services are now activated by default for the internal Kubernetes cluster.

* You can now use your own hook scripts in ``osism/cfg-cookiecutter``. These are placed in the directory
  ``{{cookiecutter.project_name}}/scripts.d/`` directory. The scripts are executed in alphabetical order.
  The scripts must be executable.

* When using the single service plays for Ceph (``ceph-osds``, ``ceph-mons``, ..), no service restarts
  are executed for other services. This can be adjusted with the ``ceph_handler_*_restart`` parameters.
  The default value is ``false``.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     ceph_handler_crash_restart
     ceph_handler_mdss_restart
     ceph_handler_mgrs_restart
     ceph_handler_mons_restart
     ceph_handler_osds_restart
     ceph_handler_rbdmirrors_restart
     ceph_handler_rgws_restart

  The following example now makes it possible when adding new OSDs to really only start the OSDs that
  have been newly added and to avoid a restart of all OSDs in the cluster or on a node.

  .. code-block:: console

     osism apply ceph-osds -e ceph_handler_osds_restart=False

* The restart of Ceph Services is now throttled. By default, only one Ceph service is restarted at a time.
  This can be adjusted with the ``ceph_handler_*_restart_throttle`` parameters. The default value is ``1``.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     ceph_handler_crash_restart_throttle
     ceph_handler_mdss_restart_throttle
     ceph_handler_mgrs_restart_throttle
     ceph_handler_mons_restart_throttle
     ceph_handler_osds_restart_throttle
     ceph_handler_rbdmirrors_restart_throttle
     ceph_handler_rgws_restart_throttle

* OVN container images will be built without the ``-march=broadwell`` parameter in the future. The OVN
  images have not been updated with this release, this only serves as an announcement for the future. By
  removing the parameter, it is possible to use the OVN container images on older CPUs. It is planned to
  provide different variants of the OVN and OVS container images in the future to enable parameters for
  modern CPUs in order to improve performance in particular.

* This has nothing to do with the release itself and is just a notice. The build of the OpenStack Zed images has been
  disabled.

7.0.2
=====

Release date: 17. April 2024

* The Ceph & OpenStack service images have not been rebuilt. No upgrades of Ceph & OpenStack and associated
  infrastructure services such as MariaDB or RabbitMQ are required.

* Properties for device type vrfs are now supported in the osism.commons.network role.

* Debian support in osism.commons & osism.services Ansible collection.

  * The roles of the osism.commons collection are now usable with Debian. The roles have been tested with Debian Bookworm.
  * The roles of the osism.services collection are now usable with Debian. The roles have been tested with Debian Bookworm.

* If the OSISM CLI is executed as root user there is now an informal warning message.

* Use a single network for ceph frontend & backend in the cookiecutter (https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rados/configuration/network-config-ref/#network-configuration-reference
  for details).

* When synchronising the configuration repository, it is now ensured that you are on the correct branch.

* Senlin images available again as rolling tag for OpenStack 2023.2.

* Zun images available again as rolling tag for OpenStack 2023.2 & 2024.1.

* New FRR configuration template for loadbalancers with an external uplink in the osism.services.frr role.

* ``scs:name-v1`` and ``scs:name-v2`` extra specs are now set via the OpenStack flavor manager.

* Task ID is now displayed in the output of the OSISM CLI for prepared tasks.

* New Makefile target in the OSISM Testbed to fetch the Wireguard configuration file: ``vpn-wireguard-config``.

* With the play ``noop`` it is now possible to run a play with noop. This is useful for testing purposes of the manager service.

* The stable repository is now used as the default for the Netdata service in the osism.services.netdata role. This avoids
  package conflicts in future.

7.0.1
=====

Release date: 27. March 2024

* It's now possible to also use custom plays in the ``kolla`` and in the ``ceph`` environments.
  As for the other environments, custom plays can now be stored there in a e.g. ``playbook-hello-world.yml``
  file and run by using e.g. ``osism apply -e kolla hello-world``.

* The version of k3s has been updated to ``1.29.2``. If Kubernetes is used, upgrade with
  ``osism apply kubernetes``.

* There is a new parameter ``ceph_custom_keys`` in the ``copy-ceph-keys`` play. This makes
  it possible to copy the keys from custom Ceph pools.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     ceph_custom_keys:
       - src: ceph.client.manila1.keyring
         dest: "{{ configuration_directory }}/environments/kolla/files/overlays/manila/ceph.client.manila1.keyring"

* There is a new parameter ``with_keycloak`` in the cookiecutter. This can now be used to
  select whether the keycloak integration should be prepared or not.

* An error in the ``ceph-pools`` play has been fixed that prevented the keys from being
  created for the pools.

* The ``ceph-iscsigws`` play has been removed. The iSCSI gateway is in maintenance as of
  November 2022. This means that it is no longer in active development and will not be
  updated to add new features.

* With ``ceph_serial`` it is now possible to define how many hosts Ansible should manage at a single time
  in the Ceph plays.

  .. code-block:: none

     osism apply ceph-mgrs -e ceph_serial=1

* With ``ANSIBLE_VERSION`` it's now possible to overwrite the use Ansible version when working with the ``run.sh``
  script inside the manager environment.

* The ``osism.commons.known_hosts`` role has been completely revised.

  * avoid duplicate entries in the destination file
  * avoid comments in the destination file
  * make use of static entries possible

    It's now possible to add a ``known_hosts`` parameter to the host_vars to
    set static known hosts entries for a specific host. When this parameter
    is set ``ssh-keygen`` will not be used to generate the known hosts entries
    on the fly.

    .. code-block:: yaml

       known_hosts:
         - ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1y...
         - ecdsa-sha2-nistp256 AAAAE2VjZHN...
         - ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1...

  * make use of extra entries possible

    It's now possible to add a ``known_hosts_extra`` parameter to the configuration
    repository to set extra known hosts entries.

    .. code-block:: yaml

       known_hosts_extra:
         - testbed-node-1.testbed.osism.xyz ssh-rsa AAAAB3Nza...
         - testbed-node-2.testbed.osism.xyz ssh-rsa AAAAB3Nza...

  * The Octavia images have been updated. If Octavia is used, an upgrade must be done
    with ``osism apply -a upgrade octavia``. We addressed the following issues.

    * Backport of https://review.opendev.org/c/openstack/octavia/+/896995 to fix errors
      when deleting LB with broken amphorae.

    * Bugfix for https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/890 (octavia (ovn) does
      not find existing subnet) by enabling the use of the custom CA for octavia
      user session queries with the following PR:
      https://github.com/osism/container-images-kolla/pull/412

7.0.0
=====

Release date: 20. March 2024

General notes
-------------

* Shortly before the release, `gilt <https://github.com/retr0h/gilt>`_
  made a major release which led to breaking changes. It is therefore important
  for the moment to install ``python-gilt < 2`` when synchronising the
  configuration repository against the generics. In the CI and within the container
  images, we currently use ``python-gilt == 1.2.3``. This is also the version that's
  currently installed in the container images and that's set in the ``requirements.txt``.

Deprecations
------------

* The role for deploying the Tang service (``osism.services.tang``) is deprecated in preparation for removal
  as it is currently not in a usable state. An attempt will be made to make the role usable until the next
  release. The same applies to Clevis integration via the ``osism.commons.clevis`` role.

Removals
--------

* The role for deploying the OpenLDAP service (``osism.services.openldap``) has been removed.

* The manager plays to control the Vault service (``seal``, ``unseal``, ..) have been removed as these tasks will
  be realized directly via the OSISM CLI (``osism set vault password``, ..) in the future.

* The role for deploying the Bird service (``osism.services.bird``) has been removed.

New features
------------

* With the ``osism manage image octavia`` command it is possible to rotate the Octavia Amphora image,
  which is rebuilt daily. Older images are deactivated. The old images must be removed manually after
  rotating the amphorae instances.

* With the ``osism manage image clusterapi`` command it is possible to import all currently stable Cluster
  API images (v1.27, v1.28, and v1.29). As soon as new minor or major versions are available, these are also
  imported. Old and no longer used versions must currently be removed manually.

* The persistence feature in Octavia can enabled with the new ``enable_octavia_jobboard`` parameter.
  The jobboard in Octavia is an `experimental feature <https://docs.openstack.org/octavia/latest/install/install-amphorav2.html>`_.
  It is not recommended to use it in production.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     enable_octavia_jobboard: "yes"

  This requires an additional database, which is only created when Octavia play is run in bootstrap mode
  first.

  .. code-block:: none

     osism apply -a bootstrap octavia

  The secret ``octavia_persistence_database_password`` (see above) must be added to
  ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml`` before.

* In preparation for the migration to Rook, the Rook operator is deployable on the internal Kubernetes
  cluster with ``osism apply rook``. The Rook operator is not yet used for the Ceph deployment. For the deployment
  of Ceph we still use the ceph-ansible project. For the next release a tool called ``rookify`` is planned to
  migrate the Ceph deployment from ceph-ansible to Rook.

* The roles of the osism.commons collection are now usable with CentOS 9. The roles have been tested with
  CentOS 9.

* The roles of the osism.services collection are now usable with CentOS 9. The roles have been tested with
  CentOS 9.

* With the openstack-resource-manager it is now possible to clean up orphaned amphora instances of Octavia
  or volumes that are stuck in the DELETING state.

* Kubernetes can now be deployed with k3s-ansible on the management plane and the control plane.

* It is now possible to manage the Ceph pools independently of ceph-osds Play using ceph-pools.

Upgrade notes
-------------

* The switch from classic queue mirroring and durable queues to quorum queues
  in RabbitMQ has not yet been tested and documented. This is planned for the
  next release. The switch is not yet recommended.

* The ``hosts_interface`` parameter is now set to ``internal_interface`` by default.

* The Keycloak deployment via Docker Compose, which was previously included
  as a technical preview, has been completely revised and is now deployed on
  Kubernetes. No migration from the old deployment via Docker Compose to the
  new deployment via Kubernetes has been prepared. If you are currently using
  the Keycloak service, do not upgrade the Keycloak service and contact us in
  advance.

* The Keystone role ``service`` is required by a number of OpenStack services. The
  role has been created automatically with new deployments for some time now. It is
  possible that this role is not yet available on older deployments and must be created
  once in preparation for the upgrade. You can check whether the role is available in
  the output of ``openstack --os-cloud admin role list``. If it does not exist, it can
  be created with ``openstack --os-cloud admin role create service``.

* The use of ProxySQL for MariaDB is now possible and it is possible to switch
  to it as part of the upgrade. It is not mandatory and there is no recommendation.
  The parameter ``enable_proxysql`` is added to ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``
  for this purpose.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     enable_proxysql: yes

  The secrets listed below (``proxysql_admin_password``, ``proxysql_stats_password``,
  ``mariadb_monitor_password``) must also be added or changed.

  When migrating to ProxySQL, it is important to upgrade MariaDB first.

  When migrating to ProxySQL, it is important to perform the loadbalancer upgrade
  before all OpenStack service upgrades. To make sure that the OpenStack services
  continue to work after the upgrade when ProxySQL is enabled as part of the upgrade,
  the ProxySQL service must have been deployed first. The ProxySQL service is deployed
  with the loadbalancer play.

  It is possible that connectivity with the database may be interrupted for a short time
  during the migration. It is therefore recommended to carry out extensive tests on the
  staging environment in advance.

* The following secrets must be added in ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml``:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     octavia_persistence_database_password:  # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     prometheus_bcrypt_salt:                 # generate with: pwgen 22 1 <-- there's a 22
     prometheus_grafana_password:            # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     prometheus_password:                    # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     proxysql_admin_password:                # generate with: pwgen 32 1
     proxysql_stats_password:                # generate with: pwgen 32 1

* The parameter ``mariadb_monitoring_password`` in ``environments/kolla/secrets.yml``
  has to be renamed to ``mariadb_monitor_password``. If the parameter is not present,
  it is added.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     mariadb_monitor_password:     # generate with: pwgen 32 1

* The following parameters must be removed from the configuration repository from
  ``environments/kolla/configuration.yml``:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     ceph_nova_user: nova
     ceph_nova_keyring: ceph.client.nova.keyring

* Parameters for the Netbox service in ``environments/infrastructure/configuration.yml`` or
  ``secrets.yml`` must now also be added in ``environments/manager/configuration.yml`` or
  ``secrets.yml``. In an upcoming  release, the parameters can be removed from the
  infrastructure environment.

* The Ansible callback plugin ``osism.commons.still_alive`` is now available to avoid timeouts
  for long-running tasks. This currently has to be explicitly enabled in the Ansible configuration.
  This is done in the ``environments/ansible.cfg`` file in the configuration repository.
  The callback plugin is enabled by default in the future. After this change has been made, the
  update of the manager must be performed. A manager with a version before OSISM 7.0.0 cannot be
  longer used if this plugin is set in ``environments/ansible.cfg``.

  .. code-block:: ini

     [defaults]
     ...
     stdout_callback = osism.commons.still_alive

* In the inventory, the ``nova_backend`` parameter must be added to the host vars of
  compute nodes where local storage is used.

  .. code-block:: yaml

     nova_backend: default

* The SSL certificate file ``haproxy.pem`` is now available in a different location in the
  ``haproxy`` container. Previously it was stored under ``/etc/haproxy/haproxy.pem``. From
  now on it is stored under ``/etc/haproxy/certificates/haproxy.pem``. If you have customised
  the configuration for the haproxy service or use overlays for this, adjust the locations of
  the SSL certificate as required.

* Due to the upgrade from Fluentd to version 5, some directory names within the container
  image for Fluentd have changed. If you have worked with overlay files in the Fluentd service,
  check these in advance. Currently we know that ``/var/run/td-agent`` is now available as
  ``/var/run/fluentd`` (check `GitHub issue #864 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/864>`_
  for details).  We assume that other directory names have changed similarly.

Known issues
------------

* If error ``Couldn't fetch the key client.bootstrap-rbd at /var/lib/ceph/bootstrap-rbd/."``
  occurs when updating Ceph in task ``create potentially missing keys (rbd and rbd-mirror)``,
  create directory ``/var/lib/ceph/bootstrap-rbd/`` on the 1st control node used for Ceph.
  Use the UID ``64045`` and the GID ``64045``. Set ``0755`` as permissions.

* There are currently problems when using a custom CA in combination with Octavia. A bugfix
  for this will be made available with OSISM 7.0.1 (`osism/issues#890 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/890>`_).

  There is another problem when using Octavia in combination with OVN which leads to a leakage
  of ports when deleting load balancers (`osism/issues#921 <https://github.com/osism/issues/issues/921>`_).
  A bugfix for this is also expected to be available with OSISM 7.0.1.

* The manager service is updated via ``osism update manager``. If this command is not yet
  available, you can use ``osism-update-manager`` as an alternative.

  .. code-block:: none

     osism: 'update manager' is not an osism command. See 'osism --help'.

Other
-----

* Refstack 2022.11 results
 
  .. code-block:: none

     ======
     Totals
     ======
     Ran: 356 tests in 1221.9879 sec.
      - Passed: 353
      - Skipped: 3
      - Expected Fail: 0
      - Unexpected Success: 0
      - Failed: 0
     Sum of execute time for each test: 715.6658 sec.

References
----------

OpenStack 2023.2 press announcement: https://www.openstack.org/software/openstack-bobcat

OpenStack 2023.2 release notes: https://releases.openstack.org/bobcat/index.html

Release notes for each OpenStack service:

* Barbican: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/barbican/2023.2.html
* Ceilometer: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ceilometer/2023.2.html
* Cinder: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/cinder/2023.2.html
* Designate: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/designate/2023.2.html
* Glance: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/glance/2023.2.html
* Heat: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/heat/2023.2.html
* Horizon: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/horizon/2023.2.html
* Ironic: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/ironic/2023.2.html
* Keystone: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/keystone/2023.2.html
* Manila: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/manila/2023.2.html
* Neutron: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/neutron/2023.2.html
* Nova: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/nova/2023.2.html
* Octavia: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/octavia/2023.2.html
* Placement: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/placement/2023.2.html
* Skyline: https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-apiserver/2023.2.html, https://docs.openstack.org/releasenotes/skyline-console/2023.2.html
